In this and the next several videos, we will switch back to working with the Bert model.
Here.
In this code challenge you will explore the impact of two manipulations.
One is to randomly shuffle embeddings dimensions from one layer without actually changing any of the
activation values.
And then in a later exercise you will leave the dimensions unshuffled but add a bit of Gaussian noise,
and that would lead to an investigation and discussion about the distributions of activations versus
Gaussian added random noise.
So here we are with exercise one.
Import the large version of the Bert model and push it to the GPU.
Then you want to create a hook function that looks like this.
You can see that this hook function will be implanted into every layer.
Although the idea is that you will define a global variable called layer to shuffle that will allow
you to pick exactly one layer to shuffle and leave all the other layers untouched.
Then the idea of the random shuffling is that you randomly swap all of the orders of the dimensions
of the output of the transformer, so you're not actually changing any of the values.
All the numbers are exactly the same, they're just in a different order.
This is also done for only one token, not for all of the tokens.
So you will also need a variable in here that tells the code which of the token indices to randomly
shuffle as you are implanting this hook into all the layers.
Make sure to save all of the hook handles in a list, because you will need to remove those hooks from
the model in a later exercise.
So that's it for exercise one.
Please.
Now pause the video and work through this exercise.
And now I will switch to code import some libraries here.
I'm importing the Bert large model and its tokenizer and then pushing those to the GPU, or at least
pushing the model to the GPU.
Okay.
And here we see the Bert large version of the model.
There are 24 transformer blocks.
And yeah, as you remember from earlier in the course, the naming conventions of these layers and these
matrices is a little bit different from how OpenAI names them in the GPT two models.
Okay.
So now let me explain this hook function.
So this you've already seen.
So we are I'm going to implant this hook into every layer of the model that you see here.
So model dot encoder dot layer.
So implanting it directly into each transformer block.
And then uh but there's this if statement here.
And the conditional states that we will only actually follow the rest of this code here.
If the current layer that is being processed during the feedforward sweep matches this variable here.
Layer two shuffle.
And this variable here is not defined anywhere inside this function.
It's a global variable.
It's defined outside the function.
And that's great because it means that we can define this later on.
For example in a for loop over different layers.
By the way here I'm defining this to be something ludicrously large.
This just makes sure that this never is true.
This statement is never true until I explicitly change this variable name.
And we're going to use that in order to get a clean version of the model with no shuffling at all.
Okay, so if this is true, if we are currently processing the layer that gets shuffled, then I unpack
the tuple.
And here I am getting the activations for this particular token index.
Remember this is the sequence in the batch.
These are the tokens and these are the embeddings vectors.
So yeah we're only going to work with one sequence.
So a batch of just one element here.
Okay.
This is also a variable that I define up here.
But we can redefine it later on.
Okay.
And then here I am randomly permuting indices for hidden size.
This is the embedding dimension.
And then I'm simply shuffling all of the rows of this activations matrix and inserting it back into
the hidden variable.
This tensor.
Here again only for this token we are not going to change any of the other tokens.
Repack the tuple.
So yeah, this is a list here corresponding to this hidden part.
And then the rest of the input here.
And then printing that out here okay.
Now I'm also printing out which layer is actually being shuffled.
This is just some information for you.
This is something you can add while you are writing code while you're developing code.
But in practice, you probably don't want to include print statements like this.
Because if you're doing a lot of forward passes, uh, this can just get really, really tedious to
output.
Okay, so then I'm storing all of the handles and then implanting this hook into every layer.
Now in this exercise you will tokenize some text and see how well the model can predict the missing
token.
Perhaps you recognize this image.
It's from the Wizard of Oz movie, not the one that came out in 2025.
The older one, which is actually from 1939 and stars Judy Garland.
Anyway, this is the quote you want to tokenize.
Pay no attention to that man.
Blank the curtain.
Of course, the missing word here is behind.
Pay no attention to that man behind the curtain.
And then we are going to see how well the model can predict that the masked word should be the word
behind.
Now, when you tokenize the sentence, you can print out a table like this so that you can confirm the
tokenization.
And you also need a variable that tells you which token the mask is in.
And that is the variable that we will use to hook the model to tell the model which token index to randomly
shuffle.
Next, you can push all of these tokens through the intact model, so do not shuffle anything in any
of the layers.
Don't manipulate anything in the model.
This is going to be the baseline comparison model.
And of course you should give these logits a different variable name so that you don't overwrite them
in later exercises.
Also, I want you to extract the hidden states when you're doing the forward pass.
Now, you won't actually need the hidden states for this exercise or for exercises three and four,
but you will need them for exercises five.
Okay, then the final part of this exercise is to go through each of these tokens.
Grab the token with the maximum final logit and that is the model's prediction for that word.
Now we're not actually masking out any of the other tokens, so it's a little trivial that the accuracy
will be pretty high for a lot of these words.
But the important question is what does the model predict in place of the masked token?
Okay.
So that is your goal for this exercise.
Now you can pause the video and get to work.
And now I will switch to code.
Here is our text.
Pay no attention to that man.
Blank the curtain.
Okay, now here I'm actually explicitly calling the Tokenizers mask token.
This is different from how I've set it up before.
You know, earlier in the course I was doing this, which is also fine.
Uh, here, I'm just showing you some alternatives.
So that is the text here.
I get the mask.
Target index.
And that is where all of these tokens match the mask token ID.
Okay.
Now, this variable name is exactly the same, with the same capitalizations as this variable up here,
which I defined in the hook, so that now overwrites this variable, and it means we are not going to
be shuffling token index one.
We are going to be shuffling token index, whatever this is I think it's seven.
Yeah.
Token index seven okay.
So now I'm going to run a forward pass through the model, push all the tokens first to the GPU and
then through the model which is also on the GPU.
And here I'm redefining this is already defined to be some large number.
But I redefined it again, just in case you want to come back to this code after already defining layer
to shuffle to be for example four.
Okay.
So again, what this means is that this statement up here in the hook, where are we here?
This is never true.
This is always false when layer number equals or sorry when layer to shuffle equals 40,000.
So that means that this code never gets run.
This print statement also never gets run.
So we are running through a pure unadulterated version of the model.
You can see here that the print statement of which layer was manipulated.
That doesn't get printed out here.
Okay.
Very good.
So now what I'm doing is searching through the logits for each of the token in the list of tokens.
And then I find the maximum logit.
And then I decode that to get me a predicted text for each word.
And then printing that out in a table like this.
As I mentioned, all of this stuff is kind of trivial.
The model actually sees the word.
So it's a little bit trivial that its accuracy is pretty high, though it's not perfect.
But here is the important test we want to know what does the model predict in place of this word?
Mask.
And this is not trivial.
The model guesses it correctly.
Maybe it is a little bit trivial because this statement here pay no attention to that man behind the
curtain.
That's a pretty famous statement from that movie.
So it's going to be written lots and lots of times throughout the internet.
So the model is probably trained on exactly this quote many times through.
Now we are ready for the experiment.
You are going to randomly shuffle the embeddings dimensions for each layer for one token, and we see
what is the word that the model predicts for the masked token.
Now you only want to shuffle one layer at a time, so all of the other layers will be untouched.
And you can do that in a for loop.
So inside that for loop, randomly shuffle the dimensions of just that layer.
And also just for the masked token, not for the other tokens, and then find the top prediction based
on the model output logits, and also store the logsoftmax logit value corresponding to the token behind
so the correct word.
There are two visualizations you can make for this exercise.
The first one is printing out the results of the token prediction, where for each layer that gets shuffled,
you print out the text of the maximum predicted token, so corresponding to the largest token value,
the largest logit value.
The second visualization is the logsoftmax of the correct token.
The blue line up here corresponds to the logsoftmax for the Unshuffled model that you tested in the
previous exercise.
It looks like it has a value of zero, although it's technically not exactly zero, it just happens
to be a small number.
Obviously, these shuffled log softmax values are going to be considerably less than zero.
But the question is what they look like and whether there's any pattern.
For example, if they increase or maybe they decrease as we go deeper into the model.
You see the sign, you know what to do.
And now I will switch to code.
Here is the variable that I will use to store the results.
So it is layers by two because we have two outputs that we want to store the predicted token which is
actually an integer, although it's going to technically be coded as a floating point here, but that's
no big deal.
And the second one is the logit for the or the log softmax of the logit for the correct word, the target
word which is behind.
So here I'm looping over all of the layers, setting this variable to be this looping index.
And by the way, you don't actually need to have this as a separate line.
You could also actually just put this directly into the for loop statement like this.
I do that in later videos.
Okay.
So this means we are only going to shuffle this one layer, not any of the other layers.
Do a forward pass here.
And here I get the output logits for the first sequence in this batch, only for this, uh, masked
token index.
And then yeah, calculating logsoftmax.
And then I get the one for the correct target.
Again, this is the word behind that.
Uh, what the model actually should output.
So that's the prediction.
And then over here I'm getting the actual prediction.
So whichever logit had the largest numerical value.
Okay.
And then we can print this out.
So this is printing out from the uh from the hook function, and then we can print out the results here.
And they are hilariously terrible.
They're awful.
It's just a bunch of punctuations.
Give me this.
You know, this is just complete gibberish.
This makes no sense.
It's not even choosing semantically related words.
It's not even choosing words in most of these cases.
So even though we're only shuffling one layer at a time, this has a really, really catastrophic impact
on the rest of the model processing.
Certainly for this token, then we can look at the log softmax values and that you see here okay.
So again this this value is not exactly zero.
We can see what it is.
Here.
It is.
It is -0.04.
So it's pretty close to zero.
Uh but anyway the point is that for every layer it's really a lot smaller.
Remember these are log transformed, numbers.
So ten you know, log ten.
This is like multiple orders of magnitude smaller, more negative than what it is in the unshuffled
version of this model.
There's no patterns.
It doesn't go up or down.
It's not getting better or worse.
As we go deeper into the model.
This manipulation is just catastrophic.
Anywhere you put it in the model, that is the end of our exploration of completely reshuffling the
dimensions.
I hope you found it interesting and insightful, but that manipulation is so catastrophic that it's
just really not something you'd ever want to do in practice.
It's a good thing to learn about, and I hope you feel that it increased your coding and LLM knowledge.
But yeah, not something you would do outside of the context of a class.
Anyway, what we are going to do now is repeat the experiment, but change the manipulation.
So the overall goal for exercise four is very similar to the overall goal of exercise three.
But you're going to do a different manipulation, which means you need a new hook function.
So you can start the code for exercise four by removing all of the hooks that you created in exercise
one, then write a new hook function which looks like this.
So you extract the final result of the transformer block, and then you redefine it to be itself, plus
some noise.
So no more shuffling, no more reordering.
You leave the vectors exactly as they are in the order that they should appear, but you add some noise.
Now the shape of the noise distribution should be a Gaussian or normal distribution.
So normal distribution for the noise that you add.
A question here is what should be the standard deviation of the noise?
I am not going to tell you what to do here.
Instead, I will let you experiment around with that.
Now that's not something I want you to do rigorously, like varying the levels of noise.
Basically, you can just try hard coding a few different values of the noise standard deviation that
you add to the embeddings vectors.
And then you can rerun this exercise a few times just to get a bit of a sense of what happens when you
use too little noise or too much noise.
Of course, I will have a longer discussion about this when I switch to code, but then for the experiment
itself, you can basically copy the loop code over all of the layers that you did from exercise three,
and also copy all of the visualizations and just modify them as necessary.
I think you are going to enjoy this exercise and find it to be a refreshing difference compared to the
results of exercise three.
And now I will switch to code and discuss the code solution, and also discuss some issues around adding
noise to internal model activations.
Here I am removing all of the hooks that I have previously created from exercise one.
And here I'm defining a new hook function.
Now most of this function looks really similar to the previous hook function, and this is really the
only difference.
Okay, so here I'm extracting the embeddings vectors for this sequence, which is only the only one
we have here for this target token and for all of the embeddings dimensions.
And here you can see I'm generating some noise.
So the size is the same as the size of this matrix or this vector, and then I am scaling it up by a
multiple of the standard deviation.
Okay.
So I hope that makes sense.
So this here this generates noise with a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one.
And then what I'm doing here is changing the standard deviation so that instead of the standard deviation
being one the standard deviation will be whatever the standard deviation of this variable is.
This is pretty handy code here, because it means that we don't actually need to know what is the standard
deviation of this variable a priori.
We can simply define the standard deviation here to be the standard deviation of the actual vectors.
And then I'm just scaling that up by a factor of two and by a factor of two I don't know I tried several
different values ranging from larger to uh, or smaller to larger.
And I just decided that two was a decent amount of noise that had a noticeable impact without completely
ruining the model's ability to predict the token.
Okay, but this is rather subjective.
It's a little bit arbitrary.
We are not going to do a really rigorous investigation of the impact of various levels of noise in this
code challenge.
Okay, anyway, then back to the, uh, hidden, uh, variable vectors.
I'm adding the activations to the noise and then replacing those with the output.
Okay.
Very nice.
And then, uh, new hooks here.
Although technically we don't need this, uh, because this is the last time that we will need this
hook.
But anyway, uh, it's good practice to do this.
Okay, so now all of this code I'm not going to go through.
It's exactly the same as the code for the previous exercise, just using different variables and that
different hook.
And now we see that we actually do get the correct word behind in not all of the cases, but certainly
in early on we get it a lot.
And then it starts getting a little bit weirder as we get the manipulations deeper into the model.
But they're also, you know, noticeably, mostly words.
So we do get some punctuations here.
But this is also very different from the previous manipulation.
We were just randomly shuffling all of the dimensions.
So here we're still getting words even though they might not be the correct target word.
Okay.
And then here I'm plotting the results here.
So we see that where this was correct.
So where it got the right answer we get a logit that's still very high.
Uh again these are not exactly zero but pretty close to zero.
And now here there's a couple of weird things going on here.
But in general, as we get deeper into the model, the impact of adding noise is worsening.
And remember, it's exactly the same amount of noise proportionally for each of these layers.
So this is really something about going deeper into the model, closer to the model's prediction of
what that missing token should be.
Okay.
So those are the results.
The last thing I want to discuss here is about the nature of the distribution of the noise.
Where is this hook function up here.
So I was very clear that I want you to create Gaussian random noise.
That is a very specific distribution of random numbers given by rand n.
And why did I tell you to do that?
Because I wanted you to think about whether it is appropriate to add Gaussian noise, as opposed to
any other distribution of random numbers.
Now the question there is what is the impact of the nature of the distribution shape on the calculations
inside the model.
We have seen you have seen lots of histograms of activations from all over the model.
Throughout this course, you have seen that some of the activations look relatively Gaussian.
Some of them do not look very Gaussian.
And so that's the question.
Is it really appropriate to add random noise from a Gaussian distribution to these activations here?
That is a question that we will address or at least kind of look into in the next exercise.
So if you would like to think about this on your own first, and feel free to pause the video and give
it some thought before going to the next exercise.
This is the last exercise of this code challenge.
The goal here is just to follow up on the observation from the previous exercise about the noise distribution
and whether it really is appropriate to use a Gaussian distribution.
So here you see a histogram of Gaussian noise that was added to the embeddings in the hook from exercise
four.
There are 24 other lines in this plot that I have blanked out.
And those correspond to the histograms of the activation values for each of the 24 transformer blocks.
If you exported the hidden states in the forward pass from exercise two, then you already have all
the data that you need here.
You just need to create histograms of all the activations and then visualize them in this plot.
If you no longer have that variable or you didn't export the hidden states, no problem, totally fine.
You do another forward pass here.
But make sure that you are not adding noise for this exercise.
So this really should be the pure unshuffled and not noise ified embeddings vectors at the output of
each transformer block.
The rest of this exercise just involves some critical thinking.
What is the shape of the noise distribution look like relative to the shape of the other distributions?
Are they the same?
Are they different?
Do you think it's appropriate to add Gaussian noise the way we did in the hook in exercise four?
And if not, what do you think would be a suitable alternative?
Of course I will discuss my opinion of this when I switch to code, but first you should switch to code
and generate that figure.
This code I have commented out here because I don't actually need to run it, and that's because earlier
in the code challenge I already Be exported.
The hidden states.
So this here is just in case you need to run it again.
All right.
So we I'm just extracting out these hidden states into a variable XX.
And now here I'm looping over the layers.
This is just to vectorize or flatten the hidden states from each layer.
So I detach them, bring them back to the CPU, transform them to numpy and then flatten them.
And then I create a histogram of those data using these bin boundaries.
So minus four to plus 4 in 101 steps.
These are somewhat arbitrary values that I just came up with.
After looking at the graph and going back and forth and tweaking this a little bit.
So you can try changing these values if you like.
Okay.
So all of this corresponds to the activation, the histograms of the actual activations that the model
is producing without injecting any noise or any shuffling or any other manipulations.
And then here what I'm doing is generating random noise.
This is exactly the same formulation that I used in the hook function.
Only difference is that up there I used the PyTorch random function.
And here I'm using numpy.
But the generation and the distribution are certainly the same.
The scaling factor is the same.
And then I'm making that histogram and plotting that as a black line.
Okay.
So now we see what that looks like.
So here we have the Gaussian noise.
It looks like Gaussian of course.
And interestingly all of the other distributions are not Gaussian.
They do have one peak.
So they are monopolar distributions but they are way too narrow.
They go down to zero way too quickly to be a Gaussian distribution.
So the Gaussian is going to have wider tails than this.
Than any of the distributions in any of these transformer layers.
It doesn't seem like there's a real difference across the layers.
They are getting a little bit thinner, but the distribution shape seems to be pretty narrow.
Uh, all the way throughout.
So in other words, all of these distributions across all of the transformer blocks, all these embeddings,
vectors, they are different from each other in terms of their distributions, but those are relatively
similar compared to the huge difference between the shapes of those distributions together versus the
Gaussian normal distribution that we see here, which I added onto these vectors.
So here is the question.
Is it appropriate and valid to add noise when the noise is sampled from a completely different distribution
as what the actual data show.
This is not you know, I'm not asking this as a rhetorical question where the answer is obviously no.
It's really unclear.
You see many situations in science, in physics and biology where the noise has a different distribution
from the signal.
And so what that means in a large language model, I think is still fairly open.
It's an unanswered question.
I think that was a fun code challenge.
I also have to say that I was really surprised to learn that the original Wizard of Oz movie was from
1939.
For some reason, I thought it was like from the 70s until I made this lecture and looked it up.
Anyway, as I discussed earlier, randomly shuffling dimensions, especially if you are randomly shuffling
every dimension is absolutely catastrophic.
Adding noise to existing activations, on the other hand, is basically just injecting some uncertainty
and stochasticity into the model that will make the model have a wider and flatter probability distribution
when selecting the next token.
Now, it's not necessarily a bad thing, but it can be an interesting experimental manipulation.
To be honest, I'm not sure what is the conclusion about the distribution of noise versus signal.
As I mentioned at the end of the Python session, there are tons of examples in physics and biology
and finance and psychology and so on, where signals have different distributions than noise.
And so the fact that they are differently distributed is certainly something to know about.
But I wouldn't dismiss it out of hand as saying that it's inappropriate simply because the distribution
shapes are different.